But before actually rendering the data,
we need to solve one important part of
the app that has to do with routing.
We're going to create
a single-page application.
I mean, it's not mandatory,
we don't need to.
We can create a multi-page application,
that is,
you have multi HTML files,
different HTML files, the home page,
the order,
each detail has different HTML files.
But we are doing
a client-side application.
We will do a single-page application,
which means we will have just one HTML,
and with JavaScript, we will change
the contents of the page based on the URL.
And we have at least for now two icons.
We have this coffee icon and
we have this cart icon.
They're not just icons, if I inspect them,
they are links, anchors.
So actually, if I click Order,
I wanna go to the Orders section.
And if I click Back in the coffee
when I go to the Home,
to the menu so
we should navigate between pages.
So let's get into that part,
how to do that part And
how to understand how that works.
So I'm going back to the slides for
a second and
we're going to see how to navigate
between pages using the DOM.
So, you understand the idea
we have different sections.
And the idea is that I'm in Section 1.
If I click on section 2,
I wanna change the section.
If I click on section 3, I wanna see
section 3, so simple to understand.
How to do that from a DOM point of view.
One way is that every
time you change the page,
you remove the previous page from the DOM,
and you inject a new page into the DOM.
By the way, what's a page?
It's a concept that we
are creating right now.
It's not really a DOM concept, it's like
the service, it's just a design pattern.
We call it a page.
It can be also a route,
a view. Just put any name,
it's an abstract concept.
In this case, it will be a DOM element
that will render the contents of one
particular section of my app.
So one way is to remove from the DOM
one page and put the other one, okay?
The other option is to
have all the pages in
the DOM that then use hide and show.
I'm not saying that one is better than
the other one, it depends on the case.
So, quick example, so to,
finally understand this,
if you wanna remove the previous page and
inject the new one, it may look like this.
You have first a nav section
that it's always available.
So that section is always available, and
then we have a section element, this case,
Section 1,
because it's the one that we are seeing.
If I click on the nav on Section 2,
I'm removing that section from the DOM and
I'm adding another section element.
So now I'm seeing Section 2.
And of course,
the same if I do this on Section 3.
Make sense?
We remove elements from the DOM,
we put elements back.
They can be a section, a div,
whatever HTML element you want.
That's one technique.
The other technique is to hide and show.
In this case, the three sections
will always be in the DOM.
I will just change visibility, for
example, using the HTML hidden attribute.
So with hidden then you can say,
okay, if I'm in Section 1,
that's the one without hidden, and
the other two are currently not visible.
If I click Section 2, I'm just
changing attributes to show and hide.
Yeah, this version might not be as
scalable if you have a large application.
But again, not every app that we are doing
these days is a large application.
So it's still a possibility that
can be really performant for
some apps, so it depends on the app, okay?
So we need to change the content of
the page based on what the user select.
And typically, these days,
we call this a router.
But that's another concept that
is not in the DOM, it's an idea,
it's an abstract idea router,
a little tool that will make this work.
Do we have a router in the DOM?
No, a router in this case,
it's something that we will
code using the DOM API's okay?
But you will see it's actually
pretty simple, it's not so
complicated these days.
So we have the homepage where we will see
the menu of options for the coffee store.
Then we may get into the details of one
particular product like cappuccino I wanna
get and get the description or the new
cinnamon dolce latte with honey wherever.
Well, we can read the description
calories, and for
that we get into the details.
Then we have the order,
where we will have the current
state of my order with my shopping cart,
okay?
So in our case,
we won't have multiple HTML files.
So, we will use the DOM APIs and
something known as web components
that we haven't covered yet.
And we will use the History API to push
new entries to the navigation history.
And here comes the magic part
that is actually pretty simple.
So as a web developer, sometimes we think
that if we see a URL in the URL bar,
that's because there is, I mean,
the web server has answer to that URL.
Well, today, that's not always the case.
With JavaScript using the History API,
you can fake the URL after the domain.
You cannot fake the domain the host,
you can fake the path wherever it
comes after the first forward slash.
So you can fake it.
And maybe in the server it's 404,
but you can change it.
And not just you can change it,
you can listen for changes.
So if the user is using the Back button,
then you can know that and
know the current URL, even if that
URL does not exist on the server.
So that's the History API, that's how we
build a router that it's really simple.
So this is how it works.
To push a new URL,
we use history.pushState.
We pass an optional state object, that's
an object where we can pass metadata,
you will see how to use that later.
There is a second argument
that today in the spec
is defined as unused, so we don't use it.
So they have to do with the history of
the spec, but actually, that was a title.
The string that was used as a title for
the history menu, blah, blah, blah..
But finally, the spec,
meaning the folks working on the spec
decided not to use that but
they didn't wanna remove that because
of some browsers already
implemented that bla bla bla bla.
Well, anyway we have the second
argument that we won't use or
we can pass anything including null.
And then the URL, the fake URL,
client-side only URL.
And you will see that,
that will trigger a change in the URL.
Is it changing the contents of the page?
No, not at all, change the URL.
It's up to us to capture that change
in the URL and maybe change the DOM.
And that's the idea of building a router.
And for that, here at the bottom,
the second part,
is how you listen for
changes in the URL, it's just popstate.
So, on the window,
every time the URL is changing,
with a big warning that I
will tell you in a minute,
we will get that event being fired.
And we can get what's the current URL.
And based on the current URL,
we can decide which element to show,
hide or inject.
Make sense?
That's the idea, from an API point
of view, it's actually not so
difficult, okay?
Popstate won't be fire if the user
clicks on an external link or
if the user goes and
changes the URL manually.
Because if that happens, the browser
will initiate the new navigation and
it's getting out of our web app.
So this event handler only works when we
are working with
the history in our own app.
Does it make sense?
Because we are still under
the umbrella of a browser, and
the browser works with page navigations,
okay?
So if the user clicks on google.com,
you won't get that history,
because that means you're getting out of
your web app the browser will stop you,
your router won't be able to detect that.
By the way, the same happens on
React router or Angular router,
you can't detect routes that
are outside of your app.
So if you're creating
a single page application,
you should set up your server properly.
That means, that what happens if
the user tries, that fake URL or
press refresh on a URL that is fake,
the server will return 404.
So, typically when you're doing
a single page application,
the same happens with React.
So this is not specifically
a Vanilla.js problem,
you need to set up your server so
every request, every URL,
should forward to the index.html,
not redirect. Forward.